Smelting and Refining of Cu, Pb, Zn, Ti and Ni 
 
In the production and refining of metals, valuable components are separated from worthless 
material in  a series of different physical  and chemical reactions. The end-product is metal 
containing  controlled  amounts  of  impurities.  Primary  smelting  and  refining  produce  metals 
directly from ore concentrates, while secondary smelting and refining produces metals from scrap 
and process waste. Scrap includes bits and pieces of metal parts, bars, turnings, sheets and wire 
that are off-specification or worn-out but are capable of being recycled 
Overview of Processes 
Two  metal  recovery  technologies  are  generally  used  to  produce  refined 
metals, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical.  Pyrometallurgical  processes  use  heat  to 
separate desired metals from other materials. These processes use differences between oxidation 
potentials, melting points, vapour pressures, densities and/or miscibility of the ore components 
when melted.  
Hydrometallurgical technologies differ from pyrometallurgical processes in that the desired metals 
are  separated  from  other  materials  using  techniques  that  capitalize  on  differences  between 
constituent solubilities and/or electrochemical properties in aqueous solutions. 
Pyrometallurgy 
During  pyrometallic  processing,  an  ore,  after  being beneficiated (concentrated  by  crushing, 
grinding, floating and drying), is sintered or roasted (calcined) with other materials such as 
baghouse dust and flux. The concentrate is then smelted, or melted, in a blast furnace in order to 
fuse the desired metals into an impure molten bullion. This bullion then undergoes a third 
pyrometallic process to refine the metal to the desired level of purity. Each time the ore or bullion 
is heated, waste materials are created. Dust from ventilation and process gases may be captured in 
a baghouse and are either disposed of or returned to the process, depending upon the residual metal 
content. Sulphur in the gas is also captured, and when concentrations are above 4% it can be turned 
into sulphuric acid. Depending upon the origin of the ore and its residual metals content, various 
metals such as gold and silver may also be produced as by-products. 
Roasting is an important pyrometallurgical process. Sulphating roasting is used in the production 
of cobalt and zinc. Its purpose is to separate the metals so that they can be transformed into a water-
soluble form for further hydrometallurgical processing. The smelting of sulphidic ores produces a 
partially oxidized metal concentrate (matte). In smelting, the worthless material, usually iron, 
forms a slag with fluxing material and is converted into the oxide. The valuable metals acquire the 
metallic form at the converting stage, which takes place in converting furnaces. This method is 
used  in  copper  and  nickel  production.  Iron,  ferrochromium,  lead,  magnesium  and  ferrous 
compounds are produced by reduction of the ore with charcoal and a flux (limestone), the smelting 
process usually taking place in an electric furnace. 
The high temperature required for the pyrometallurgical treatment of metals is obtained by burning 
fossil fuels or by using the exothermic reaction of the ore itself (e.g., in the flash smelting process). The flash smelting process is an example of an energy-saving pyrometallurgical process in which 
iron and sulphur of the ore concentrate are oxidized. The exothermic reaction coupled with a heat 
recovery system saves a lot of energy for smelting. The high sulphur recovery of the process is 
also beneficial for environmental protection. Most of the recently built copper and nickel smelters 
use this process. 
Hydrometallurgy 
Hydrometallurgical  processes  includes  leaching,  precipitation,  electrolytic  reduction,  ion 
exchange, membrane separation and solvent extraction. The first stage of hydrometallurgical 
processes is the leaching of valuable metals from less valuable material, for example, with 
sulphuric acid. Leaching is often preceded by pre-treatment (e.g., sulphating roasting). The 
leaching process often requires high pressure, the addition of oxygen or high temperatures. 
Leaching may also be carried out with electricity. From the leaching solution the desired metal or 
its compound is recovered by precipitation or reduction using different methods. 
Electrolysis of metals in aqueous solutions is also considered to be a hydrometallurgical process. 
In the process of electrolysis the metallic ion is reduced to the metal. The metal is in a weak acid 
solution from which it precipitates on cathodes under the influence of an electrical current. Most 
non-ferrous metals can also be refined by electrolysis. 
Often metallurgical processes are a combination of pyro- and hydrometallurgical processes, 
depending on the ore concentrate to be treated and the type of metal to be refined. An example is 
nickel production. 
Copper 
Copper is mined in both open pits and underground mines, depending upon the ore grade and the 
nature of the ore deposit. Copper ore typically contains less that 1% copper in the form of sulphide 
minerals. Once the ore is delivered above the ground, it is crushed and ground to a powdery 
fineness and then concentrated for further processing. In the concentration process, ground ore is 
slurried with water, chemical reagents are added, and air is blown through the slurry. The air 
bubbles attach themselves to the copper minerals and are then skimmed off the top of the flotation 
cells. The concentrate contains between 20 and 30% copper. The tailings, or gangue minerals, from 
the ore fall to the bottom of the cells and are removed, dewatered by thickeners and transported as 
a slurry to a tailings pond for disposal. All water used in this operation, from dewatering thickeners 
and the tailings pond, is recovered and recycled back into the process. 
Copper can be produced either pyrometallurgically or hydrometallurgically depending upon the 
ore-type used as a charge. The ore concentrates, which contain copper sulphide and iron sulphide 
minerals, are treated by pyrometallurgical processes to yield high purity copper products. Oxide 
ores, which contain copper oxide minerals that may occur in other parts of the mine, together with 
other oxidized waste materials, are treated by hydrometallurgical processes to yield high purity 
copper products. 
Copper conversion from the ore to metal is accomplished by smelting. During smelting the 
concentrates are dried and fed into one of several different types of furnaces. There the sulphide minerals are partially oxidized and melted to yield a layer of matte, a mixed copper-iron sulphide 
and slag, an upper layer of waste. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The matte is further processed by converting. The slag is tapped from the furnace and stored or 
discarded in slag piles onsite. A small amount of slag is sold for railroad ballast and for sand 
blasting grit. A third product of the smelting process is sulphur dioxide, a gas which is collected, 
purified and made into sulphuric acid for sale or for use in hydrometallurgical leaching operations. 
Following smelting, the copper matte is fed into a converter. During this process the copper matte 
is poured into a horizontal cylindrical vessel (approximately 10ґ4 m) fitted with a row of pipes. 
The pipes, known as tuyères, project into the cylinder and are used to introduce air into the 
converter. Lime and silica are added to the copper matte to react with the iron oxide produced in 
the process to form slag. Scrap copper may also be added to the converter. The furnace is rotated 
so that the tuyères are submerged, and air is blown into the molten matte causing the remainder of 
the iron sulphide to react with oxygen to form iron oxide and sulphur dioxide. Then the converter 
is rotated to pour off the iron silicate slag. Once all of the iron is removed, the converter is rotated back and given a second blow of air during 
which the remainder of the sulphur is oxidized and removed from the copper sulphide. The 
converter is then rotated to pour off the molten copper, which at this point is called blister copper 
(so named because if allowed to solidify at this point, it will have a bumpy surface due to the 
presence of gaseous oxygen and sulphur). Sulphur dioxide from the converters is collected and fed 
into the gas purification system together with that from the smelting furnace and made into 
sulphuric acid. Due to its residual copper content, slag is recycled back to the smelting furnace. 
Blister copper, containing a minimum of 98.5% copper, is refined to high purity copper in two 
steps. The first step is fire refining, in which the molten blister copper is poured into a cylindrical 
furnace, similar in appearance to a converter, where first air and then natural gas or propane are 
blown through the melt to remove the last of the sulphur and any residual oxygen from the copper. 
The  molten  copper  is  then  poured  into  a  casting  wheel  to  form  anodes  pure  enough  for 
electrorefining. 
In electrorefining, the copper anodes are loaded into electrolytic cells and interspaced with copper 
starting sheets, or cathodes, in a bath of copper sulphate solution. When a direct current is passed 
through the cell the copper is dissolved from the anode, transported through the electrolyte and re-
deposited on the cathode starting sheets. When the cathodes have built-up to sufficient thickness 
they are removed from the electrolytic cell and a new set of starting sheets is put in their place. 
Solid impurities in the anodes fall to the bottom of the cell as a sludge where they are ultimately 
collected and processed for the recovery of precious metals such as gold and silver. This material 
is known as anode slime. 
The cathodes removed from the electrolytic cell are the primary product of the copper producer 
and contain 99.99+% copper. These may be sold to wire-rod mills as cathodes or processed further 
to a product called rod. In manufacturing rod, cathodes are melted in a shaft furnace and the molten 
copper is poured onto a casting wheel to form a bar suitable for rolling into a 3/8 inch diameter 
continuous rod. This rod product is shipped to wire mills where it is extruded into various sizes of 
copper wire. 
In the hydrometallurgical process, the oxidized ores and waste materials are leached with sulphuric 
acid from the smelting process. Leaching is performed in situ, or in specially prepared piles by 
distributing acid across the top and allowing it to percolate down through the material where it is 
collected. The ground under the leach pads is lined with an acid-proof, impermeable plastic 
material to prevent leach liquor from contaminating groundwater. Once the copper-rich solutions 
are collected they can be processed by either of two processes—the cementation process or the 
solvent extraction/electrowinning process (SXEW). In the cementation process (which is rarely 
used today), the copper in the acidic solution is deposited on the surface of scrap iron in exchange 
for the iron. When sufficient copper has been cemented out, the copper-rich iron is put into the 
smelter together with the ore concentrates for copper recovery via the pyrometallurgical route. 
In the SXEW process, the pregnant leach solution (PLS) is concentrated by solvent extraction, 
which extracts copper but not impurity metals (iron and other impurities). The copper-laden 
organic solution is then separated from the leachate in a settling tank. Sulphuric acid is added to 
the pregnant organic mixture, which strips the copper into an electrolytic solution. The leachate, 
containing the iron and other impurities, is returned to the leaching operation where its acid is used for further leaching. The copper-rich strip solution is passed into an electrolytic cell known as an 
electrowinning cell. An electrowinning cell differs from an electrorefining cell in that it uses a 
permanent, insoluble anode. The copper in solution is then plated onto a starting sheet cathode in 
much the same manner as it is on the cathode in an electrorefining cell. The copper-depleted 
electrolyte is returned to the solvent extraction process where it is used to strip more copper from 
the organic solution. The cathodes produced from the electrowinning process are then sold or made 
into rods in the same manner as those produced from the electrorefining process. 
Electrowinning cells are used also for the preparation of starting sheets for both the electrorefining 
and electrowinning processes by plating the copper onto either stainless steel or titanium cathodes 
and then stripping off the plated copper. 
 
Hazards and Their Prevention 
Prevention of health risks and accidents in the metallurgical industry is primarily an educational 
and technical question. Medical examinations are secondary and have only a complementary role 
in the prevention of health risks. A harmonious exchange of information and collaboration 
between the planning, line, safety and occupational health departments within the company give 
the most efficient result in the prevention of health risks. 
The best and least costly preventive measures are those taken at the planning stage of a new plant 
or process. In planning of new production facilities, the following aspects should be taken into 
account as a minimum: 
•  The potential sources of air contaminants should be enclosed and isolated. 
•  The design and placement of the process equipment should allow easy access for maintenance 
purposes. 
•  Areas in which a sudden and unexpected hazard may occur should be monitored 
continuously. Adequate warning notices should be included. For example, areas in which 
arsine or hydrogen cyanide exposure might be possible should be under continuous 
monitoring. 
•  Addition and handling of poisonous process chemicals should be planned so that manual 
handling can be avoided. 
•  Personal occupational hygiene sampling devices should be used in order to evaluate the real 
exposure of the individual worker, whenever possible. Regular fixed monitoring of gases, 
dusts and noise gives an overview of exposure but has only a complementary role in the 
evaluation of exposure dose. 
•  In space planning, the requirements of future changes or extensions of the process should be 
taken into account so that the occupational hygiene standards of the plant will not worsen. •  There should be a continuous system of training and education for safety and health 
personnel, as well as for foremen and workers. New workers in particular should be 
thoroughly informed about potential health risks and how to prevent them in their own 
working environments. In addition, training should be done whenever a new process is 
introduced. 
•  Work practices are important. For example, poor personal hygiene by eating and smoking in 
the worksite may considerably increase personal exposure. 
•  The management should have a health and safety monitoring system which produces 
adequate data for technical and economic decision making. 
  
The following are some of the specific hazards and precautions that are found in smelting and 
refining. 
Injuries 
The smelting and refining industry has a higher rate of injuries than most other industries. 
Sources of these injuries include: splattering and spills of molten metal and slag resulting in 
burns; gas explosions and explosions from contact of molten metal with water; collisions with 
moving locomotives, wagons, travelling cranes and other mobile equipment; falls of heavy 
objects; falls from a height (e.g., while accessing a crane cab); and slipping and tripping injuries 
from obstruction of floors and passageways. 
Precautions include: adequate training, appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) (e.g., 
hard hats, safety shoes, work gloves and protective clothing); good storage, housekeeping and 
equipment maintenance; traffic rules for moving equipment (including defined routes and an 
effective signal and warning system); and a fall protection programme. 
Heat 
Heat stress illnesses such as heat stroke are a common hazard, primarily due to infrared radiation 
from furnaces and molten metal. This is especially a problem when strenuous work must be done 
in hot environments. 
Prevention of heat illnesses can involve water screens or air curtains in front of furnaces, spot 
cooling, enclosed air-conditioned booths, heat-protective clothing and air-cooled suits, allowing 
sufficient time for acclimatization, work breaks in cool areas and an adequate supply of 
beverages for frequent drinking. 
Chemical hazards 
Exposure to a wide variety of hazardous dusts, fumes, gases and other chemicals can occur 
during smelting and refining operations. Crushing and grinding ore in particular can result in 
high exposures to silica and toxic metal dusts (e.g., containing lead, arsenic and cadmium). There can also be dust exposures during furnace maintenance operations. During smelting operations, 
metal fumes can be a major problem. 
Dust and fume emissions can be controlled by enclosure, automation of processes, local and 
dilution exhaust ventilation, wetting down of materials, reduced handling of materials and other 
process changes. Where these are not adequate, respiratory protection would be needed. 
Many smelting operations involve the production of large amounts of sulphur dioxide from 
sulphide ores and carbon monoxide from combustion processes. Dilution and local exhaust 
ventilation (LEV) are essential. 
Sulphuric acid is produced as a by-product of smelting operations and is used in electrolytic 
refining and leaching of metals. Exposure can occur both to the liquid and to sulphuric acid 
mists. Skin and eye protection and LEV is needed. 
The smelting and refining of some metals can have special hazards. Examples include nickel 
carbonyl in nickel refining, fluorides in aluminium smelting, arsenic in copper and lead smelting 
and refining, and mercury and cyanide exposures during gold refining. These processes require 
their own special precautions. 
Other hazards 
Glare and infrared radiation from furnaces and molten metal can cause eye damage including 
cataracts. Proper goggles and face shields should be worn. High levels of infrared radiation may 
also cause skin burns unless protective clothing is worn. 
High noise levels from crushing and grinding ore, gas discharge blowers and high-power electric 
furnaces can cause hearing loss. If the source of the noise cannot be enclosed or isolated, then 
hearing protectors should be worn. A hearing conservation program including audiometric 
testing and training should be instituted. 
Electrical hazards can occur during electrolytic processes. Precautions include proper electrical 
maintenance with lockout/tagout procedures; insulated gloves, clothing and tools; and ground 
fault circuit interrupters where needed. 
Manual lifting and handling of materials can cause back and upper extremity injuries. 
Mechanical lifting aids and proper training in lifting methods can reduce this problem. 
Pollution and Environmental Protection 
Emissions of irritant and corrosive gases like sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide and hydrogen 
chloride may contribute to air pollution and cause corrosion of metals and concrete within the 
plant and in the surrounding environment. The tolerance of vegetation to sulphur dioxide varies 
depending on the type of forest and soil. In general, evergreen trees tolerate lower concentrations 
of sulphur dioxide than deciduous ones. Particulate emissions may contain non-specific 
particulates, fluorides, lead, arsenic, cadmium and many other toxic metals. Wastewater effluent 
may contain a variety of toxic metals, sulphuric acid and other impurities. Solid wastes can be 
contaminated with arsenic, lead, iron sulphides, silica and other pollutants. Smelter management should include evaluation and control of emissions from the plant. This is 
specialized work which should be carried out only by personnel thoroughly familiar with the 
chemical properties and toxicities of the materials discharged from the plant processes. The 
physical state of the material, the temperature at which it leaves the process, other materials in 
the gas stream and other factors must all be considered when planning measures to control air 
pollution. It is also desirable to maintain a weather station, to keep meteorological records and to 
be prepared to reduce output when weather conditions are unfavourable for dispersal of stack 
effluents. Field trips are necessary to observe the effect of air pollution on residential and 
farming areas. 
Sulphur dioxide, one of the major contaminants, is recovered as sulphuric acid when present in 
sufficient quantity. Otherwise, to meet emission standards, sulphur dioxide and other hazardous 
gaseous wastes are controlled by scrubbing. Particulate emissions are commonly controlled by 
fabric filters and electrostatic precipitators. 
Large amounts of water are used in flotation processes such as copper concentration. Most of this 
water is recycled back into the process. Tailings from the flotation process are pumped as slurry 
into sedimentation ponds. Water is recycled in the process. Metal-containing process water and 
rainwater are cleaned in water-treatment plants before discharging or recycling. 
Solid-phase wastes include slags from smelting, blowdown slurries from sulphur dioxide 
conversion to sulphuric acid and sludges from surface impoundments (e.g., sedimentation 
ponds). Some slags can be reconcentrated and returned to smelters for reprocessing or recovery 
of other metals present. Many of these solid-phase wastes are hazardous wastes that must be 
stored according to environmental regulations. 
Copper Production Hazards and their prevention 
The major hazards are exposure to ore dusts during ore processing and smelting, metal fumes 
(including copper, lead and arsenic) during smelting, sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide during 
most smelting operations, noise from crushing and grinding operations and from furnaces, heat 
stress from the furnaces and sulphuric acid and electrical hazards during electrolytic processes. 
Precautions  include:  LEV  for  dusts  during  transfer  operations;  local  exhaust  and  dilution 
ventilation for sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide; a noise control and hearing protection 
programme; protective clothing and shields, rest breaks and fluids for heat stress; and LEV, PPE 
and electrical precautions for electrolytic processes. Respiratory protection is commonly worn to 
protect against dusts, fumes and sulphur dioxide. Table 1. Process materials inputs and pollution 
outputs for copper smelting and refining 
 
 
 Process  Material input  Air emissions  Process  Other wastes 
wastes 
Copper  Copper ore,     Flotation  Tailings containing 
concentration  water, chemical  wastewaters  waste minerals such 
reagents,  as limestone and 
thickeners  quartz 
Copper leaching  Copper     Uncontrolled  Heap leach waste 
concentrate,  leachate 
sulphuric acid 
Copper smelting  Copper  Sulphur dioxide,     Acid plant blowdown 
concentrate,  particulate  slurry/sludge, slag 
siliceous flux  matter  containing iron 
containing  sulphides, silica 
arsenic, 
antimony, 
cadmium, lead, 
mercury and 
zinc 
Copper  Copper matte,  Sulphur dioxide,     Acid plant blowdown 
conversion  scrap copper,  particulate  slurry/sludge, slag 
siliceous flux  matter  containing iron 
containing  sulphides, silica 
arsenic, 
antimony, 
cadmium, lead, 
mercury and 
zinc 
Electrolytic  Blister copper,        Slimes containing 
copper refining  sulphuric acid  impurities such as 
gold, silver, antimony, 
arsenic, bismuth, iron, 
lead, nickel, selenium, 
sulphur and zinc 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Lead 
The primary lead production process consists of four steps: sintering, smelting, 
drossing and pyrometallurgical refining. To begin, a feedstock comprising mainly 
of lead concentrate in the form of lead sulphide is fed into a sintering machine. Other 
raw materials may be added including iron, silica, limestone flux, coke, soda, ash, 
pyrite, zinc, caustic and particulates gathered from pollution control devices. In the 
sintering machine the lead feedstock is subjected to blasts of hot air which burn off 
the sulphur, creating sulphur dioxide. The lead oxide material existing after this 
process contains about 9% of its weight in carbon. The sinter is then fed along with 
coke, various recycled and cleanup materials, limestone and other fluxing agents 
into a blast furnace for reducing, where the carbon acts as a fuel and smelts or melts 
the lead material. The molten lead flows to the bottom of the furnace where four 
layers form: “speiss” (the lightest material, basically arsenic and antimony); “matte” 
(copper sulphide and other metal sulphides); blast furnace slag (primarily silicates); 
and lead bullion (98% lead, by weight). All layers are then drained off. The speiss 
and matte are sold to copper smelters for recovery of copper and precious metals. 
The blast furnace slag which contains zinc, iron, silica and lime is stored in piles and 
partially recycled. Sulphur oxide emissions are generated in blast furnaces from 
small quantities of residual lead sulphide and lead sulphates in the sinter feed. 
Rough lead bullion from the blast furnace usually requires preliminary treatment in 
kettles  before  undergoing  refining  operations.  During  drossing,  the  bullion  is 
agitated in a drossing kettle and cooled to just above its freezing point (370 to 
425°C). A dross, which is composed of lead oxide, along with copper, antimony and 
other elements, floats to the top and solidifies above the molten lead. 
The dross is removed and fed into a dross furnace for recovery of the non-lead useful 
metals. To enhance copper recovery, drossed lead bullion is treated by adding 
sulphur-bearing materials, zinc, and/or aluminium, lowering the copper content to 
approximately 0.01%. 
During the fourth step, the lead bullion is refined using pyrometallurgical methods 
to remove any remaining non-lead saleable materials (e.g., gold, silver, bismuth, 
zinc, and metal oxides such as antimony, arsenic, tin and copper oxide). The lead is 
refined in a cast iron kettle by five stages. Antimony, tin and arsenic are removed 
first. Then zinc is added and gold and silver are removed in the zinc slag. Next, the 
lead is refined by vacuum removal (distillation) of zinc. Refining continues with the 
addition of calcium and magnesium. These two materials combine with bismuth to 
form an insoluble compound that is skimmed from the kettle. In the final step caustic 
soda and/or nitrates may be added to the lead to remove any remaining traces of metal impurities. The refined lead will have a purity of 99.90 to 99.99% and may be 
mixed with other metals to form alloys or it may be directly cast into shapes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Process materials inputs and pollution outputs for lead smelting and refining 
Process  Material input  Air emissions  Process wastes  Other wastes 
Lead sintering  Lead ore, iron,  Sulphur dioxide,       
silica, limestone  particulate matter 
flux, coke, soda,  contain-ing 
ash, pyrite, zinc,  cadmium and 
caustic,  lead 
baghouse dust 
Lead smelting  Lead sinter,  Sulphur dioxide,  Plant washdown  Slag containing 
coke  particulate matter  wastewater, slag  impurities such as 
contain-ing  granulation water  zinc, iron, silica 
cadmium and  and lime, surface 
lead  impoundment 
solids Lead drossing  Lead bullion,        Slag containing 
soda ash,  such impurities as 
sulphur,  copper, surface 
baghouse dust,  impoundment 
coke  solids 
Lead refining  Lead drossing          
bullion 
 
Zinc 
Zinc concentrate is produced by separating the ore, which may contain as little as 2% zinc, from 
waste rock by crushing and flotation, a process normally performed at the mining site. The zinc 
concentrate is then reduced to zinc metal in one of two ways: either pyrometallurgically by 
distillation (retorting in a furnace) or hydrometallurgically by electrowinning. The latter accounts 
for approximately 80% of total zinc refining. 
Four processing stages are generally used in hydrometallurgic zinc refining: calcining, leaching, 
purification and electrowinning. Calcining, or roasting, is a high-temperature process (700 to 1000 
°C) that converts zinc sulphide concentrate to an impure zinc oxide called calcine. Roaster types 
include multiple-hearth, suspension or fluidized-bed. In general, calcining begins with the mixing 
of zinc-containing materials with coal. This mixture is then heated, or roasted, to vaporize the zinc 
oxide which is then moved out of the reaction chamber with the resulting gas stream. The gas 
stream is directed to the baghouse (filter) area where the zinc oxide is captured in baghouse dust. 
All of the calcining processes generate sulphur dioxide, which is controlled and converted to 
sulphuric acid as a marketable process by-product. 
Electrolytic processing of desulphurized calcine consists of three basic steps: leaching, purification 
and electrolysis. Leaching refers to the dissolving of the captured calcine in a solution of sulphuric 
acid to form a zinc sulphate solution. The calcine may be leached once or twice. In the double-
leach method, the calcine is dissolved in a slightly acidic solution to remove the sulphates. The 
calcine is then leached a second time in a stronger solution which dissolves the zinc. This second 
leaching step is actually the beginning of the third step of purification because many of the iron 
impurities drop out of the solution as well as the zinc. 
After leaching, the solution is purified in two or more stages by adding zinc dust. The solution is 
purified as the dust forces deleterious elements to precipitate so that they can be filtered out. 
Purification is usually conducted in large agitation tanks. The process takes place at temperatures 
ranging from 40 to 85°C and pressures ranging from atmospheric to 2.4 atmospheres. The elements 
recovered during purification include copper as a cake and cadmium as a metal. After purification 
the solution is ready for the final step, electrowinning. 
Zinc electrowinning takes place in an electrolytic cell and involves running an electric current from 
a lead-silver alloy anode through the aqueous zinc solution. This process charges the suspended 
zinc and forces it to deposit onto an aluminium cathode which is immersed in the solution. Every 
24 to 48 hours, each cell is shut down, the zinc-coated cathodes removed and rinsed, and the zinc mechanically stripped from the aluminium plates. The zinc concentrate is then melted and cast into 
ingots and is often as high as 99.995% pure. 
Electrolytic zinc smelters contain as many as several hundred cells. A portion of the electrical 
energy is converted into heat, which increases the temperature of the electrolyte. Electrolytic cells 
operate at temperature ranges from 30 to 35°C at atmospheric pressure. During electrowinning a 
portion of the electrolyte passes through cooling towers to decrease its temperature and to 
evaporate the water it collects during the process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hazards and their prevention 
The major hazards are exposure to ore dusts during ore processing and smelting, metal fumes 
(including zinc and lead) during refining and roasting, sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide 
during most smelting operations, noise from crushing and grinding operations and from furnaces, 
heat  stress  from  the  furnaces  and  sulphuric  acid  and  electrical  hazards  during  electrolytic 
processes. Precautions  include:  LEV  for  dusts  during  transfer  operations;  local  exhaust  and  dilution 
ventilation for sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide; a noise control and hearing protection 
programme; protective clothing and shields, rest breaks and fluids for heat stress; and LEV, PPE, 
and electrical precautions for electrolytic processes. Respiratory protection is commonly worn to 
protect against dusts, fumes and sulphur dioxide. 
Table 3. Process materials inputs and pollution outputs for zinc smelting and refining 
Process  Material input  Air emissions  Process wastes  Other wastes 
Zinc calcining  Zinc ore, coke  Sulphur     Acid plant 
dioxide,  blowdown slurry 
particulate 
matter 
containing zinc 
and lead 
Zinc leaching  Zinc calcine,     Wastewaters    
sulphuric acid,  containing 
limestone, spent  sulphuric acid 
electrolyte 
Zinc purification  Zinc-acid     Wastewaters  Copper cake, 
solution, zinc  containing  cadmium 
dust  sulphuric acid, 
iron 
Zinc  Zinc in a     Dilute sulphuric  Electrolytic cell 
electrowinning  sulphuric  acid  slimes/sludges 
acid/aqueous 
solution, lead-
silver alloy 
anodes, 
aluminium 
cathodes, barium 
carbonate or 
strontium, 
colloidal additives 
 
Titanium 
Synthetic rutile is a chemically modified form of ilmenite which has had most of the iron removed. 
The product’s composition is between 85 and 95 per cent titanium dioxide (TiO ). The upgraded 
2
TiO  products are similar to naturally formed rutile. Ilmenite, an iron/titanium oxide mineral, can 
2
be upgraded to synthetic rutile (or upgraded ilmenite) containing between 85 and 95 per cent highly 
valued titanium dioxide. Iluka has four synthetic rutile kilns with a combined capacity of 500 – 
550 thousand tonnes per annum. The ilmenite used in the process generally has between 57 and 
60 per cent TiO  and yields about 0.6 tonnes of SR for every tonne of ilmenite used. The main 
2objective of the process is to remove the iron component of the ilmenite by reducing it to metal 
and “leaching” it to leave an upgraded titania product. This process is known as the Becher Process, 
after its inventor, Dr Robert Becher, who developed the process in Western Australia in 1961. The 
process was commercialised by Iluka’s predecessor company, RGC, in 1969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Titanium (Ti) is a soft, ductile, silvery gray metal with a melting point of 1,675 °C (3,047 °F). 
Owing to the formation on its surface of an oxide film that is relatively inert chemically, it has 
excellent corrosion resistance in most natural environments. In addition, it is light in weight, with 
a density (4.51 grams per cubic centimetre) midway between aluminum and iron. Its combination 
of low density and high strength gives it the most efficient strength-to-weight ratio of common 
metals for temperatures up to 600 °C (1,100 °F). 
Because its atomic diameter is similar to many common metals such as aluminum, iron, tin, and 
vanadium, titanium can easily be alloyed to improve its properties. Like iron, the metal can exist 
in two crystalline forms: hexagonal close-packed (hcp) below 883 °C (1,621 °F) and body-centred 
cubic (bcc) at higher temperatures up to its melting point. This allotropic behaviour and the 
capacity to alloy with many elements result in titanium alloys that have a wide range of mechanical 
and corrosion-resistant properties. Although titanium ores are abundant, the high reactivity of the metal  with  oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen in  the air at  elevated temperatures necessitates 
complicated and therefore costly production and fabrication processes. Titanium ore was first 
discovered in 1791 in Cornish beach sands by an English clergyman, William Gregor. The actual 
identification of the oxide was made a few years later by a German chemist, M.H. Klaproth. 
Klaproth gave the metal constituent of this oxide the name titanium, after the Titans, the giants 
of Greek mythology.  
Pure metallic titanium was first produced in either 1906 or 1910 by M.A. Hunter at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute (Troy, New York, U.S.) in cooperation with the General Electric Company. 
These researchers believed titanium had a melting point of 6,000 °C (10,800 °F) and was therefore 
a candidate for incandescent-lamp filaments, but, when Hunter produced a metal with a melting 
point closer to 1,800 °C (3,300 °F), the effort was abandoned. Nevertheless, Hunter did indicate 
that the metal had some ductility, and his method of producing it by reacting titanium tetrachloride 
(TiCl ) with sodium under vacuum was later commercialized and is now known as the Hunter 
4
process. Metal of significant ductility was produced in 1925 by the Dutch scientists A.E. van Arkel 
and J.H. de Boer, who dissociated titanium tetraiodide on a hot filament in an evacuated glass bulb. 
In 1932 William J. Kroll of Luxembourg produced significant quantities of ductile titanium by 
combining TiCl  with calcium. By 1938 Kroll had produced 20 kilograms (50 pounds) of titanium 
4
and was convinced that it possessed excellent corrosion and strength properties. At the start 
of World War II he fled Europe and continued his work in the United States at the Union Carbide 
Company and later at the U.S. Bureau of Mines. By this time, he had changed the reducing agent 
from calcium to magnesium metal. Kroll is now recognized as the father of the modern titanium 
industry, and the Kroll process is the basis for most current titanium production. A U.S. Air 
Force study conducted in 1946 concluded that titanium-based alloys were engineering materials 
of potentially great importance, since the emerging need for higher strength-to-weight ratios in 
jet aircraft structures and engines could not be satisfied efficiently by either steel or aluminum. As 
a result, the Department of Defense provided production incentives to start the titanium industry 
in 1950. Similar industrial capacity was founded in Japan, the U.S.S.R., and the United Kingdom. 
After this impetus was provided by the aerospace industry, the ready availability of the metal gave 
rise to opportunities for new applications in other markets, such as chemical processing, medicine, 
power generation, and waste treatment. 
 
 
Ores 
 
Titanium is the fourth most abundant structural metal on Earth, exceeded only by aluminum, iron, 
and magnesium.  Workable  mineral  deposits  are  dispersed  worldwide  and  include  sites 
in Australia,  the  United  States,   Canada,   South  Africa,   Sierra 
Leone, Ukraine, Russia, Norway, Malaysia, and several other countries. 
  
Rutile; pyrophylliteRutile on pyrophyllite from Mono County, California.B.M. Shaub 
The predominate minerals are rutile, which is about 95 percent titanium dioxide (TiO ), and 
2
ilmenite (FeTiO ), which contains 50 to 65 percent TiO . A third mineral, leucoxene, is an 
3 2
alteration of ilmenite from which a portion of the iron has been naturally leached. It has no specific 
titanium content. Titanium minerals occur in alluvial and volcanic formations. Deposits usually 
contain between 3 and 12 percent heavy minerals, consisting of ilmenite, rutile, leucoxene, zircon, 
and monazite.  
 
Mining And Concentrating 
Although workable known reserves of rutile are diminishing, ilmenite deposits are abundant. 
Typical mining is by open pit. A suction bucket wheel on a floating dredge supplies a mineral-rich 
sand to a set of screens called trommels, which remove unwanted materials. Typically, the minerals 
are separated from waste material by gravity separation in a wet spiral concentrator. The resulting 
concentrates are separated by passing them through a complex series of electrostatic, magnetic, 
and gravity equipment.   
Extraction and Refining -TiCl
4 
 
The  production  of  titanium  metal  accounts  for  only  5  percent  of  annual  titanium  mineral 
consumption; the rest goes to the titanium pigment industry. Pigments are produced using either 
a sulfate process or a more environmentally acceptable carbo-chlorination process (described 
below) that converts TiO  into TiCl . The latter process also supplies the TiCl  necessary for the 
2 4 4
production of titanium metal. 
Environmental and economic constraints dictate that the ore feed stocks converted by carbo-
chlorination processes now in use contain greater than 90 percent TiO . Only natural rutile meets 
2
this requirement, but ilmenite can be upgraded through combinations of pyrometallurgical and 
hydrometallurgical techniques to produce a synthetic rutile of 90 to 93 percent TiO . In addition, 
2
titaniferous magnetite ores can be smelted to produce pig iron and titanium-rich slags. Rutile, leucoxene, synthetic rutile, and slag can then be mixed to provide a feed stock of more than 90 
percent TiO  for the chlorination process. 
2
In the first step of this process, the oxide ores are reacted with chlorine in a fluidized bed of 
petroleum coke. Oxygen combines with carbon (C) in the coke to produce carbon monoxide (CO) 
and carbon dioxide (CO ), while the titanium and chlorine react to form a gaseous TiCl , as in the 
2 4
following reaction: 
 
(The X and Y represent variable quantities whose ratio depends on the reaction temperature, which 
varies between 850 and 1,000 °C [1,550 and 1,800 °F].) The raw TiCl  is cleaned of fine particles 
4
of entrained coke and titanium ore, and then it is liquified and passed through a distillation column 
to remove volatile impurities of both high and low boiling points. Vanadium oxychloride, an 
impurity with a boiling point similar to TiCl , is stripped from the product stream by reaction 
4
with mineral oil. The TiCl  is then redistilled to remove other impurities in a reflux distillation 
4
column. This process produces TiCl  of a purity exceeding 99.9 percent. Since any contaminants 
4
in the TiCl  would later be reduced along with the titanium metal, high-quality TiCl  must be 
4 4
produced to achieve high-quality metal. 
 
Titanium sponge 
 
In the production of titanium pigments, the TiCl  would be reoxidized to  TiO , but, in  the 
4 2
production of titanium metal, it is reduced with either sodium (Na) in the Hunter process or with 
magnesium (Mg) in the Kroll process: 
 
These reactions take place in large, sealed steel vessels at approximately 800 to 1,000 °C (1,450 
to 1,800 °F) in an inert argon atmosphere to avoid contamination of the final product by air or 
moisture. Both processes produce titanium in the form of a highly porous material called sponge, 
with the salts NaCl or MgCl  entrapped in the pores. The sponge is crushed, and the metal and 
2
salts are separated by either a dilute acid leach or by high-temperature vacuum distillation. The 
salts are recycled through electrolytic cells to produce sodium or magnesium for reuse in metal 
reduction and chlorine for reuse in chlorination of the ore. A different process that offers hope for 
an improved and simplified method of producing titanium metal is the direct electrowinning of 
titanium from TiCl  in fused chloride salt baths. In this case, titanium sponge collects on a steel 
4
cathode, and chlorine gas is given off at the carbon anode. The required use in this process of high-
melting-point salts, combined with the need for maintaining an inert environment, present major 
technical and economical hurdles that have to be overcome in order to achieve commercial status. 
 
Titanium Ingot 
The conversion of purified titanium sponge to a form useful for structural purposes involves 
several steps. Consolidation into titanium ingot is performed in a vacuum or argon environment 
by the consumable-electrode arc-melting process. Sponge, alloying elements, and in some cases 
recycled scrap are first mechanically compacted and then welded into a long, cylindrical electrode. The electrode is melted vertically into a water-cooled copper crucible by passing an electric 
current through it. To ensure uniform distribution of alloying elements, this primary ingot is 
remelted at least once in a similar manner. Ingots weigh between 4 and 10 tons and are up to 1,050 
millimetres (42 inches) in diameter. 
Cold-hearth melting is an alternate consolidation process that is conducted inside an argon or 
vacuum chamber containing a water-cooled, horizontal copper crucible. Heating is accomplished 
by multiple electron-beam or by argon/helium plasma torches. The molten metal flows in a 
horizontal path over the lip of the hearth into a suitably shaped, water-cooled copper mold. The 
cold-hearth process is well suited to separating high-density contaminants, which settle to the 
bottom of the hearth. For this reason, it is used primarily to recycle titanium scrap, which can 
contain carbide tool bits left over from machining operations. Consolidated ingots are processed 
into mill products such as bar, billet, wire, tubing, plate, and sheet by traditional steel facilities. 
Using the common phases present at room temperature, titanium alloys are divided into four 
classes: commercially pure, alpha, alpha-beta, and beta. Each class has distinctive characteristics. 
Pure titanium, although very ductile, has low strength and is therefore used when strength is not 
critical and corrosion resistance is desired. The alpha alloys are weldable and have good elevated-
temperature strengths. The alpha-beta alloys are widely used because of their good combinations 
of strength, toughness, and formability. The beta alloys are useful where very high tensile strengths 
are required. 
There are three important markets for titanium metal: aerospace, nonaerospace industries, and 
alloy additives. The aerospace and industrial markets utilize mill products, while the alloy-additive 
market consumes lower-cost titanium units such as scrap and sponge. Small additions of titanium 
(less than 1 percent) are added to other metals such as nickel, aluminum, and iron in order to 
improve formability and mechanical properties. 
 
Aerospace applications 
 
The  aerospace  market  is  still  the  most  important,  with  titanium  products  being  used  in 
both commercial and military aircraft. Gas turbines account for nearly half of annual titanium 
production.  Titanium  alloys  are  utilized  principally  in  the  fan  and  compressor  sections  at 
temperatures up to 600 °C. Typical parts include inlet cases, compressor blades, disks, and hubs, 
as well as spacers and seals. The large high-bypass turbofan engines utilized on wide-body 
commercial airliners could not have been developed without strong, lightweight titanium alloys. 
These engines are greater than 25 percent by weight titanium. 
 
Titanium alloys are also utilized in airframes because of their high strength-to-weight ratios, good 
toughness, and corrosion resistance. The titanium content of airframes can range from as low as 2 
percent to as high as 30 percent by weight. Typical commercial airframes are 4 to 8 percent 
titanium, while many military aircraft contain greater amounts. The metal is used in fasteners, 
landing-gear supports, springs, fail-safe straps, and numerous internal bulkhead and wing-support 
components. 
 
 Non aerospace applications 
The resistance of titanium to many corrosive environments, particularly oxidizing and chloride-
containing process streams, has led to widespread industrial applications. Titanium is resistant to 
all natural environments, including natural waste products, body fluids, and salt and brackish 
water; to most salt solutions, including chlorides, bromides, iodides, and sulfides; and to most 
oxidizing acids, organic acids, and alkaline solutions. 
When strength is not a major consideration, commercially pure titanium is the material of choice 
because of its lower cost, ease of fabrication, and good corrosion resistance. Alloyssuch as Ti–
0.15Pd, Ti–0.3Mo–0.8Ni, and Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr can extend the usefulness of the metal 
to either higher temperatures or stronger concentrations of reducing acids and acidic salts. In recent 
years, more high-strength alloys have been utilized for corrosion applications. For example, Ti–
6Al–4V, a versatile alloy that was developed in the 1950s for the aerospace industry, has become 
a very important material for medical prostheses such as hip-joint replacements because of its 
strength-to-weight  ratio  and  immunity  to  body  fluids.  Ti–3Al–8V–6Cr–4Mo–4Zr,  an  even 
stronger alloy, also has excellent resistance to high-temperature sour gas (natural gas containing 
hydrogen sulfide) and is therefore used in energy extraction for downhole tubing and casings and 
for instrumentation. 
Several industrial processes have been improved as a result of the availability of titanium. After 
titanium was introduced as a replacement for stainless-steel diffusion washers in the pulp and 
paper industry, the metal’s excellent performance encouraged the design of new displacement 
bleaching systems using up to 35 tons of titanium components. Typical parts include diffusers, 
central shafts, scrapers, filtrate pumps, heat exchangers, packing boxes, and valves. In the early 
1960s it was discovered that coating titanium with a platinum-group metal or metal oxide produced 
an anode (a negatively charged electrode) that was slow to corrode in electrolytic solutions. Coated 
titanium anodes soon replaced graphite anodes in the chlorine industry, resulting in lower costs 
and  products  of  higher  purity.  Extensions  of  this technology are  now  being  applied  to 
electrogalvanizing and tin-coating processes. 
Chemical-process industries utilize titanium heat exchangers to  eliminate corrosion problems 
caused by cooling waters containing chloride and sulfide, and several benefits can accrue from 
employing titanium on the process side of heat exchangers as well. Because the metal is resistant 
to erosion corrosion, titanium vessels can be subjected to process liquids flowing at high rates, 
thereby eliminating the danger of biofouling. In addition, titanium is the only metal known to be 
completely resistant to all forms of biofouling corrosion. These advantages, along with its light 
weight, make the metal desirable for heat exchangers in naval vessels and offshore oil platforms. 
Titanium  is  gaining  greater  recognition  in  consumer  applications,  such  as  eyeglass  frames, 
watches, sports equipment, jewelry, high-performance automobiles, and roofing. Other possible 
applications include valves for automobile engines, scrubbers for flue-gas desulfurization, marine 
and offshore risers, joints and fittings, and nuclear-waste storage and transportation casks. 
Ferro Nickel Production 
Ferronickel is vital importance to modern society. It is because ferronickel is main feedstock in 
stainless steel production. Without stainless steel, we would not be able to enjoy many of the 
things that we take for granted, such as stainless-steel appliances in our home and workplaces 
and computer.  There are two types of nickel ore on earth: nickel sulfide and nickel oxide. Nickel oxide ore is 
usually called laterite, which represents 61% nickel ore on earth and 40% of world is in the form 
of laterite. Laterite ore normally classified into two groups: 
Limonite, which occur near the surface and easily mined. Limonite layer consists of a mixture of 
minerals that have a high iron and low MgO content. The general formula of goethite, 
(Fe,Ni)OOH, is used to represent limonite ores in chemical reactions. Saprolite, occur below 
limonite on the earth crust and the saprolite ores have a low iron and a high MgO content. 
Because it is further from the surface, it is less weathered or chemically altered, than limonite. 
The minerals found in this layer are magnesium and hydroxysilicates with generic formula of  
(Mg[Ni,Co] Si O (OH) , is used to represent saprolite ores in chemical reactions. 
3 2 5 4
Feed material for ferronickel production is predominantly Saprolite, rather than Limonite. This is 
because the iron content of the saprolite ore about 15% Fe, is lower than that of limonite ore. The 
choice of saprolite ore ensures that the ferronickel product is not excessively diluted by iron. 
Production process of ferronickel consists of four main steps. 
Drying: elimination of most or a substantial portion of free moisture content of the nickel ore 
Calcination-reduction: elimination of the remainder of the free ore moisture and its crystalline 
water, preheating of the ore, and reduction of a substantial portion of the nickel and a controlled 
portion of the iron 
Electric furnace smelting: completion of reduction of the nickel separation of the product 
ferronickel 
Refining: elimination of undesirable minor elements from the ferronickel to meet market 
specification 
Production of ferro-nickel by pyrometallurgical process is still the most widely utilized method 
for the processing of nickel lateritic ores. The Ni-content of lateritic ore is normally low and in the 
range of 0.8 - 3 %. The most important production route is the RKEF (rotary kiln - electric furnace) 
process. For this route lateritic ore is screened, crushed and blended to produce a consistent process 
plant feed with defined ratios of iron and nickel as well as Si0  and MgO. This feed is charged into 
2
a rotary kiln where it is calcined and pre-reduced by coal or powdered coke. Afterwards the calcine 
and residual coke is charged into the electric furnace (also named submerged arc furnace (SAF)). 
Here it is melted by electric energy and reduced yielding crude FeNi with Ni contents usually 
between 13 and 25 %. Unreduced components (mainly FeO, Si02, MgO) are removed as slag 
whereas crude FeNi metal is tapped semi-continuously into ladles. 
This crude metal contains undesirable tramp elements such as sulfur, phosphorous, carbon and 
silicon. Especially sulfur and phosphorous are very unwanted in the steel production where most of the FeNi is used as alloying element. Therefore, the tramp elements must be removed before 
the FeNi is cast into bars or granulated. Low carbon contents are necessary to minimize the carbon 
input during steel production, which would lead to longer treatment times in the stainless-steel 
refining process. Due to differences in the lateritic deposits regarding nickel oxide and iron oxide 
content,  the  content  of  impurities,  sulfur  content  in  the  reductant  coke  etc.  the  chemical 
composition of the crude FeNi varies widely (e.g. carbon content can be up to 2 %, sulfur content 
up to 1 %).